README.md, before:

# WSL Dashboard

<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/logo/logo.png" width="128" height="128" />
</p>

A modern, high-performance, and lightweight WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux) instance management dashboard. Built with Rust and Slint for a premium native experience.

---

[![Rust](https://img.shields.io/badge/rust-v1.92+-orange.svg)](https://www.rust-lang.org)
[![Slint](https://img.shields.io/badge/UI-Slint-blue.svg)](https://slint.dev)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-GPL--3.0-blue.svg)](LICENSE)

I18N: [简体中文](./manual/README_zh_CN.md) | [繁體中文](./manual/README_zh_TW.md) | English | [日本語](./manual/README_ja.md) | [Français](./manual/README_fr.md) | [Español](./manual/README_es.md) | [Русский](./manual/README_ru.md) | [Português](./manual/README_pt.md) | [Deutsch](./manual/README_de.md) | [Italiano](./manual/README_it.md) | [Türkçe](./manual/README_tr.md) | [Bahasa Indonesia](./manual/README_id.md) | [हिन्दी](./manual/README_hi.md) | [বাংলা](./manual/README_bn.md)

---

## 🖼️ Screenshots

### Home (Light & Dark Mode)
<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/screenshot/home.png" width="48%" />
  <img src="assets/screenshot/home-dark.png" width="48%" />
</p>

### Add Instance & Settings
<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/screenshot/add.png" width="48%" />
  <img src="assets/screenshot/settings.png" width="48%" />
</p>

### About & Collapse menu
<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/screenshot/about.png" width="48%" />
  <img src="assets/screenshot/collapsed.png" width="48%" />
</p>

## 🎬 Operation Demo

Below is a demonstration of the WSL Dashboard in action:

![WSL Dashboard Demo](assets/screenshot/demo.gif)

## 🚀 Key Features

- Intuitive GUI with dark mode support and smooth animations.
- One-click management for all your WSL distributions (Start, Stop, Terminate, Unregister).
- Quick access to distribution terminals, VS Code, and File Explorer.
- Real-time WSL instance status monitoring and display.
- Export and backup to `.tar` or compressed `.tar.gz` archives.
- Import and clone instances from backups or existing distributions.
- Relocate large WSL instances (VHDX migration) to other disks to save C: drive space.
- Smart distribution installation from Microsoft Store or GitHub.
- Built-in RootFS download helper for manual installs.
- Detailed insights into VHDX file location, virtual disk size, and actual disk usage.

## System Requirements

- Windows 10 or Windows 11 with WSL enabled (WSL 2 recommended).
- At least one WSL distribution installed, or permission to install new ones.
- 64-bit CPU; 4 GB RAM or more recommended for smooth multi-distro usage.

## 📦 Installation

### Option 1: Download prebuilt binary

The easiest way to get started is to use the precompiled release:

1. Go to the [GitHub Releases](https://github.com/owu/wsl-dashboard/releases) page.
2. Download the latest `wsldashboard` executable for Windows.
3. Extract (if packaged) and run `wsldashboard.exe`.

No installer is required; the app is a single portable binary.

### Option 2: Build from source

Ensure you have the Rust toolchain (Rust 1.92+ or newer) installed.

1. Clone the repository:

   ```powershell
   git clone https://github.com/owu/wsl-dashboard.git
   cd wsl-dashboard
   ```

2. Build and run:

   - For development:

     ```powershell
     cargo run
     ```

   - Optimized release build:

     ```powershell
     cargo run --release
     ```

   - Using the build script (recommended for producing release binaries):

     > The build script requires the `x86_64-pc-windows-gnu` toolchain.

     ```powershell
     .\build\scripts\build.ps1
     ```

## 🧭 Usage Overview

- Manage existing distributions: start, stop, terminate, or unregister any WSL distro from the main view.
- Open tools quickly: launch a distro in your terminal, VS Code, or File Explorer with a single click.
- Create new instances: use the Add Instance view to install from the Microsoft Store, download RootFS images, or clone existing distributions.
- Backup and restore: export distributions to `.tar` / `.tar.gz` archives and import them later or on another machine.
- Move storage location: relocate large VHDX files to a different drive to save C: drive space.
- Monitor status: keep an eye on real-time distribution status and storage usage while WSL Dashboard runs.

## ⚙️ Configuration & Logs

All configuration is managed through the Settings view:

- Choose the default installation directory for new WSL instances.
- Configure the log directory and log level (Error / Warn / Info / Debug / Trace).
- Pick the UI language or let it follow the system language.
- Toggle dark mode and whether the app can auto-shutdown WSL after operations.
- Configure how often the app checks for updates (daily, weekly, biweekly, monthly).

Log files are written to the configured log directory and can be attached when reporting issues.

## 🛠️ Tech Stack & Performance

- Core: implemented in Rust for memory safety and zero-cost abstractions.
- UI framework: Slint, a modern GPU-accelerated UI toolkit (backend: `winit`).
- Async runtime: Tokio for highly concurrent, non-blocking system commands and I/O.
- Performance:
  - Memory usage: typically around 60–80 MB of RAM.
  - Responsiveness: near-instant startup and real-time WSL status updates using streaming.
  - Binary size: optimized release build produces a single compact executable.

## 🌍 Language Support

Full internationalization support is provided for the following languages:

| Language           | Code   | Emoji |
| :----------------- | :----: | :---: |
| English            | `en`   | 🇺🇸  |
| Simplified Chinese | `zh-CN`| 🇨🇳   |
| Traditional Chinese| `zh-TW`| 🇭🇰 / 🇹🇼 |
| Japanese           | `ja`   | 🇯🇵   |
| French             | `fr`   | 🇫🇷   |
| Spanish            | `es`   | 🇪🇸   |
| Russian            | `ru`   | 🇷🇺   |
| Portuguese         | `pt`   | 🇵🇹   |
| German             | `de`   | 🇩🇪   |
| Italian            | `it`   | 🇮🇹   |
| Turkish            | `tr`   | 🇹🇷   |
| Indonesian         | `id`   | 🇮🇩   |
| Hindi              | `hi`   | 🇮🇳   |
| Bengali            | `bn`   | 🇧🇩   |

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the GPL-3.0 – see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

Built with ❤️ for the WSL Community.

Commit message:

version 0.2.0
1. Move the distribution to the specified directory.
2. If the distribution does not support VS Code functionality, an installation prompt will be displayed.
3. Exporting and cloning Linux distributions: adding a global mutex lock.
4. Distribution settings: Set as default distribution; automatic startup on boot (startup script hook); terminal directory; VS Code directory.
5. The log download during the distribution installation shows optimizations.
6. When removing a distribution, use Remove-AppxPackage <PackageFullName> to clean up the Appx package.

README.md, after:

# WSL Dashboard

<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/logo/logo.png" width="128" height="128" />
</p>

A modern, high-performance, and lightweight WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux) instance management dashboard. Built with Rust and Slint for a premium native experience.

---

[![Rust](https://img.shields.io/badge/rust-v1.92+-orange.svg)](https://www.rust-lang.org)
[![Slint](https://img.shields.io/badge/UI-Slint-blue.svg)](https://slint.dev)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-GPL--3.0-blue.svg)](LICENSE)

I18N: [简体中文](./manual/README_zh_CN.md) | [繁體中文](./manual/README_zh_TW.md) | English | [日本語](./manual/README_ja.md) | [Français](./manual/README_fr.md) | [Español](./manual/README_es.md) | [Русский](./manual/README_ru.md) | [Português](./manual/README_pt.md) | [Deutsch](./manual/README_de.md) | [Italiano](./manual/README_it.md) | [Türkçe](./manual/README_tr.md) | [Bahasa Indonesia](./manual/README_id.md) | [हिन्दी](./manual/README_hi.md) | [বাংলা](./manual/README_bn.md)

---

## 🖼️ Screenshots

### Home (Light & Dark Mode)
<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/screenshot/home.png" width="48%" />
  <img src="assets/screenshot/home-dark.png" width="48%" />
</p>

### Add Instance & Settings
<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/screenshot/add.png" width="48%" />
  <img src="assets/screenshot/settings.png" width="48%" />
</p>

### About & Collapse menu
<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/screenshot/about.png" width="48%" />
  <img src="assets/screenshot/collapsed.png" width="48%" />
</p>

## 🎬 Operation Demo

Below is a demonstration of the WSL Dashboard in action:

![WSL Dashboard Demo](assets/screenshot/demo.gif)

## 🚀 Key Features

- Intuitive GUI with dark mode support and smooth animations.
- One-click management for all your WSL distributions (Start, Stop, Terminate, Unregister).
- Quick access to distribution terminals, VS Code, and File Explorer.
- Comprehensive distribution settings: Set as default, auto-startup on boot, and custom directory paths.
- Real-time WSL instance status monitoring and display.
- Export and backup to `.tar` or compressed `.tar.gz` archives.
- Import and clone instances from backups or existing distributions.
- Move distribution to any specified directory (VHDX migration) to save C: drive space.
- Smart distribution installation from Microsoft Store or GitHub.
- Built-in RootFS download helper for manual installs.
- Detailed insights into VHDX file location, virtual disk size, and actual disk usage.

## System Requirements

- Windows 10 or Windows 11 with WSL enabled (WSL 2 recommended).
- At least one WSL distribution installed, or permission to install new ones.
- 64-bit CPU; 4 GB RAM or more recommended for smooth multi-distro usage.

## 📦 Installation

### Option 1: Download prebuilt binary

The easiest way to get started is to use the precompiled release:

1. Go to the [GitHub Releases](https://github.com/owu/wsl-dashboard/releases) page.
2. Download the latest `wsldashboard` executable for Windows.
3. Extract (if packaged) and run `wsldashboard.exe`.

No installer is required; the app is a single portable binary.

### Option 2: Build from source

Ensure you have the Rust toolchain (Rust 1.92+ or newer) installed.

1. Clone the repository:

   ```powershell
   git clone https://github.com/owu/wsl-dashboard.git
   cd wsl-dashboard
   ```

2. Build and run:

   - For development:

     ```powershell
     cargo run
     ```

   - Optimized release build:

     ```powershell
     cargo run --release
     ```

   - Using the build script (recommended for producing release binaries):

     > The build script requires the `x86_64-pc-windows-gnu` toolchain.

     ```powershell
     .\build\scripts\build.ps1
     ```

## 🧭 Usage Overview

- Manage existing distributions: start, stop, terminate, unregister, or set as default distro from the main view.
- Configure distributions: set auto-startup behavior and customize Terminal/VS Code launch directories.
- Open tools quickly: launch a distro in your terminal, VS Code, or File Explorer with a single click.
- Create new instances: use the Add Instance view to install from the Microsoft Store, download RootFS images, or clone existing distributions.
- Backup and restore: export distributions to `.tar` / `.tar.gz` archives and import them later or on another machine.
- Move distribution: move the distribution to the specified directory for better storage management.
- Monitor status: keep an eye on real-time distribution status and storage usage while WSL Dashboard runs.

## ⚙️ Configuration & Logs

All configuration is managed through the Settings view:

- Choose the default installation directory for new WSL instances.
- Configure the log directory and log level (Error / Warn / Info / Debug / Trace).
- Pick the UI language or let it follow the system language.
- Toggle dark mode and whether the app can auto-shutdown WSL after operations.
- Configure how often the app checks for updates (daily, weekly, biweekly, monthly).

Log files are written to the configured log directory and can be attached when reporting issues.

## 🛠️ Tech Stack & Performance

- Core: implemented in Rust for memory safety and zero-cost abstractions.
- UI framework: Slint, a modern GPU-accelerated UI toolkit (backend: `winit`).
- Async runtime: Tokio for highly concurrent, non-blocking system commands and I/O.
- Performance:
  - Memory usage: typically around 60–80 MB of RAM.
  - Responsiveness: near-instant startup and real-time WSL status updates using streaming.
  - Binary size: optimized release build produces a single compact executable.

## 🌍 Language Support

Full internationalization support is provided for the following languages:

| Language           | Code   | Emoji |
| :----------------- | :----: | :---: |
| English            | `en`   | 🇺🇸  |
| Simplified Chinese | `zh-CN`| 🇨🇳   |
| Traditional Chinese| `zh-TW`| 🇭🇰 / 🇹🇼 |
| Japanese           | `ja`   | 🇯🇵   |
| French             | `fr`   | 🇫🇷   |
| Spanish            | `es`   | 🇪🇸   |
| Russian            | `ru`   | 🇷🇺   |
| Portuguese         | `pt`   | 🇵🇹   |
| German             | `de`   | 🇩🇪   |
| Italian            | `it`   | 🇮🇹   |
| Turkish            | `tr`   | 🇹🇷   |
| Indonesian         | `id`   | 🇮🇩   |
| Hindi              | `hi`   | 🇮🇳   |
| Bengali            | `bn`   | 🇧🇩   |

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the GPL-3.0 – see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

Built with ❤️ for the WSL Community.
